How to Avoid a Climate Disaster: Takeaways
Jan 6th, 2024
---
A primer on climate change. Bill Gates writes an overview of the challenge in hand, supports it with data, and delineates next steps we need to take to resolution. Below I highlight core takeaways:

1. Climate change is caused by greenhouse gases emitted from all corners of life into the atmosphere, causing it to heat, and increasing global temperatures. Carbon dioxide is the most common greenhouse gas, but there are a handful of others, including nitrous oxide and methane. To keep it simple, most combine all the different greenhouse gases into a measure known as *carbon dioxide equivalents (CO2e).* Molecules with two copies of the same atom —e.g. nitrogen and oxygen— let radiation pass straight through them and only molecules made up of different atoms, the way carbon dioxide and methane are, have the right structure to absorb radiation and start heating up. As of 2021, global emissions of greenhouse gases amounted to 51 billion a year. Getting to zero would mean we find solutions to balance our emissions back to zero. In a zero-carbon future we will still be producing some emissions, but we’ll have ways to remove the carbon they emit. 

2. The book breaks down emissions into five sources
- How we plug in (energy) — 31%
- How we make things (manufacturing) — 27% 
- How we grow things (agriculture) — 19%
- How we get around (transportation) — 16%
- How we keep cool & stay warm — 7%
    
3. Setting a goal to reduce emissions -but not eliminate them- won’t do it. 

    There’s a lot we don’t understand about things like how clouds affect warming or the impact of all this extra heat on ecosystems. We’ll probably have between 1.5 and 3 degrees Celsius of warming by mid-century, and between 4 and 8 degrees Celsius by the end of it. During the ice age, the average temperature was just 6 degrees Celsius lower than it is today. The global temperature mean has gone up just 1 degree Celsius since preindustrial times, some places have already started experiencing temperature increases of more than 2 degrees Celsius. In many ways, a 2-degrees rise wouldn’t simply be 33% worse than 1.5; it could be 100% worse. Twice as many people would have trouble getting clean water. Corn production in the tropics would go down twice as much. By mid-century, climate change could be just as deadly as COVID-19, and by 2100 it could be five times as deadly.

    Scientists are still debating whether storms are happening more often because of the heat, but they appear to be getting more powerful in general. One study estimated that Hurricane Maria in 2017 set Puerto Rico’s infrastructure back more than two decades. Hotter air can hold more moisture, and as the air gets warmer, it gets thirstier, drinking up more water from the soil and plants, leaving everything more prone to burning. Droughts will threaten the Colorado River which supplies drinking water for nearly 40 million people and irrigation for more than one-seventh of all American crops. Corn is especially sensitive to heat, and it’s the number one crop in the US, worth more than $50B a year. China —whose agricultural system provides wheat, rice, and corn for a fifth of the world’s population— could trigger a regional or even global food crisis.

    Another effect of the extra heat is that sea levels will go up. This is partly because ice is melting, and partly because seawater expands when it gets warmer. According to research cited by the IPCC, a rise of 2 degrees Celsius would cut the geographic range of vertebrates by 8%, plants by 16%, and inspects by 18%. 

    Finally, the human body’s ability to cool off depends on the air’s ability to absorb sweat as it evaporates. If the air can’t absorb your sweat, then it can’t cool you off, no matter how much you perspire. 

4. Our global use of energy will continue increasing as each person will be using more energy and as population grows. Every day, people around the world rely on more than 4B gallons of a oil, a product that costs less than Diet Coke. Most of the zero-carbon solutions are more expensive than their fossil-fuel counterparts. In part, that’s because the prices of fossil fuels don’t reflect the environmental damage they inflict so they seem cheaper than the alternative. These additional costs are called *Green Premiums*. The *International Energy Agency (IEA)* estimates that government subsidies for the consumption of fossil fuels amounted to $400B in 2018.

    Impact of climate change will vary by geographic region. All cities will be affected by climate change, but coastal cities will have the worst problems. About a billion people don’t have reliable access to electricity and half of them lived in Sub-Saharan Africa which impacts the ability to keep vaccines cold. 

    The largest energy problem we have is intermittency, and we don’t have affordable batteries that can store city-sized amounts of energy for long enough. 

    Specific to the U.S., experts used a computer model of all power grids covering the country and studied what it would take for all western states to reach California goal of 60% renewables by 2030, and for all eastern states to reach NY’s goal of 70% clean energy by that same year. What they found is that there’s simply no way for the states to do it without enhancing the power grid. America has around 1,000 gigawatts. The use of offshore wind has grown at an average annual rate of 25% in the past three years. In theory, we could generate 2,000 gigawatts from offshore wind —more than enough to meet our current needs.

    Nuclear Fission is the only carbon-free energy source that can reliably deliver power day and night, through every season, almost anywhere on earth, that has been proven to work on a large scale. The US gets around 20% of its electricity from nuclear plants. France has the highest share in the world, getting 70% of its electricity from nuclear. Bill Gates founded *TerraPower* in 2008 to design the next-generation nuclear reactor. They think they’ve created a model that solves all the key problems using a design called a traveling wave reactor. TerraPower’s reactor could run on many different types of fuel, including the waste from other nuclear facilities. The reactor would produce far less waste than today’s plants, would be fully automated —eliminating the possibility of human error— and could be built underground, protecting it from attack.

5. Concrete performs many miracles around you. It’s rust-resistant, rot-proof, and non-flammable. America alone produces more than 96 million tons of cement, one of the main ingredients of concrete. We put steel in cars, ships, and trains; refrigerators and stoves; factory machines; cans of food; and even computers. Steel is strong, cheap, durable, and infinitely recyclable. Americans use as much steel as cement. Plastics are another amazing material we use broadly. Then there’s glass — in our windows, jars and bottles, insulation, cars, and the fiber-optic cables that give you a high-speed internet connection. Aluminum goes into soda cans, foil, power lines, door knobs, trains, planes, and beer kegs. Fertilizer helps feed the world. Making all these materials emits lots of greenhouse gases. In fact, they’re responsible for about a third of all emissions worldwide. 

    We like steel because it’s both strong and easy to shape when it’s hot. To make steel, you need pure iron and carbon. Making a ton of steel produces about 1.8 tons of carbon dioxide. To make cement, you need calcium. To get calcium, you start with limestone. Make a ton of cement, and you’ll get a ton of carbon dioxide. When we make cement or steel, we release carbon dioxide as an inevitable by-product, but when we make a plastic, around half of the carbon stays in the plastic. Plastics can take hundreds of years to degrade.

    To sum up, the path to zero emissions in manufacturing looks like this:
    1. Electrify every process possible
    2. Get that electricity from a power grid that’s been decarbonized
    3. Use carbon capture to absorb the remaining emissions
    4. Use materials more efficiently

6. With agriculture, the main culprit isn’t carbon dioxide but methane —which causes 28 times more warming per molecule than carbon dioxide over the course of a century— and nitrous oxide, which causes 256 times more warming. Around the world, there are nearly a billion cattle raised for beef and dairy. The methane they burp and fart out every year has the same warming effect as 2 billion tons of carbon dioxide, account for about 4% of all global emissions. Unfortunately, there isn’t a practical zero-carbon alternative for fertilizer right now. There’s no equivalent of carbon capture for nitrous oxide. 

    There’s also more carbon in soil than in the atmosphere and all plant life combined. When you start removing trees, that stored carbon gets released into the atmosphere as carbon dioxide.

    The poor have most to lose, and the majority of them are farmers who already live on the edge and can’t withstand the droughts and floods. No other organization has done more than CGIAR to ensure that families —especially the poorest— have nutritious food to eat. Experts at CGIAR developed dozens of new maize varieties that could withstand drought conditions, each adapted to grow in specific regions of Africa. Thanks to CGIAR’s efforts, new types of rice that can tolerate drought are spreading rapidly in India where climate change is causing more dry spells during the rainy season. They’ve also developed a type of rice —nicknamed *scuba* rice— that can survive underwater for two weeks. Doubling CGIAR’s funding so it can reach more farmers is one of the main recommendations by the Global Commission on Adaption. Our commission on adaptation makes three other recommendations related to agriculture
    1. help farmers manage the risks from more chaotic weather
    2. focus on the most vulnerable people
    3. factor climate change into policy decision. Governments should be coming up with policies and incentives to help farmers reduce their emissions while growing more food at the same time. 

7. Pound for pound, the best lithium-ion battery we available today packs 35 times less energy than gasoline. Batteries are a less practical option when it comes to long-distance buses and trucks. The city of Shenzhen, China —home to 12 million people— has electrified its entire fleet of more than 16,000 buses and nearly two-thirds of its taxis. A typical truck running on diesel can go more than 1,000 miles without refueling. Because we can’t electrify cargo trucks, the only solution available today are electrofuels and advanced biofuels. We should also be exploring nuclear-powered container ships. Military submarines and aircraft carriers run on nuclear power already.

    There are four ways to cut down on emissions from transportation. One is to do less of it. Another way to cut down on emissions is to use fewer carbon-intensive materials in making cards to begin with. The third way to cut down on emissions is to use fuels more efficiently. The fourth —and most effective— way is switching to EV’s and alternative fuels. 

8. Policy is an integral part of the solution. Since 1990 the level of nitrogen dioxide in American emissions has dropped by 56% and sulfur dioxide by 88% thanks to the U.S. Clean Air Act. Lead has nearly vanished from American emissions. However, the act barely mentioned greenhouse gases at all because it was originally passed in 1970. There’s need for new and updated policies. California has committed to only buying electric buses by 2029 and to banning the sale of gas-powered cars by 2035*.* At the national level, the U.S. has the basis for such a policy with the *Renewable Fuel Standard*. Twenty-four states and Puerto Rico have joined the bipartisan U.S. Climate Alliance, committing to meet the Paris Agreement goals of reducing emissions by at least 26% by 2025. Twelve major American cities have set a goal of being carbon neutral by 2050. Governments can start the process by setting standards in their procurement programs and by creating labeling programs that give all buyers information about how “clean” different suppliers are. 

9. What getting to zero requires is to channel the world’s passion and its scientific IQ into deploying the clean energy solutions we have now, and inventing new ones, so we can stop adding greenhouse gases to the atmosphere. Countries that build great zero-carbon companies and industries will be the ones that lead the global economy in the coming decades. An independent study of the *Human Genome Project (HGP)* found that every $1 invested by the federal government in the project generated $141 in returns to the U.S. economy

    Some technologies require decades to reach economic efficiency. First Model T that rolled Henry Ford’s product line in 1908 got no better than 21 miles to the gallon. Today, the top hybrid on the market gets 58 miles to the gallon. Solar cells were introduced in the 1970s. They converted about 15% of the sunlight that hit them into electricity. Today they convert ~25%. Prices of solar-generated electricity has dropped 90% since 2009. 

    It’s a mistake to think of innovation only in the strict, technological sense. Innovation is not just a matter of inventing a new machine or some new process; it’s also coming up with new approaches to business models, supply chains, markets, and policies that will help new inventions come to life and reach a global scale. 

10. Five Questions to Ask In Every Climate Conversation
    1. How much of the 51 billion tons are we talking about?
    Focus on funding technologies that could remove at least 500 million tons a year if they’re successful and fully implemented. 
    2. What’s the plan for cement?
    Passenger cars represent less than half of all the emissions from transportation, which in turn is 16% of all emissions worldwide. Meanwhile, making steel and cement alone accounts for around 10% of emissions. 
    3. How much power are we talking?
    4. How much space do you need?
    5. How much is this going to cost?

    *Direct Air Capture (DAC)* is an expensive and largely unproven technology, but if it can work at a large scale, it would allow us to capture carbon dioxide no matter when or where it was produced. The one DAC facility now in operation, based in Switzerland, is absorbing gas that might have been spewed out by a coal-fired plant in Texas 10 years ago. 
    
    Cost of removing a ton of carbon from the air, a figure that hasn’t been firmly established, is at least $200. With some innovation, we can realistically expect it to get down to $100/ton. The technology behind DAC isn’t ready yet for global deployment, and even if it were, DAC would be an extremely inefficient method for solving the world’s carbon problem. We’d need to build more than 50,000 DAC plants around the world just to manage the emissions we’re producing right now. In addition, DAC doesn’t work on methane or other greenhouse gases, just carbon dioxide. 
    
 11. Innovation is especially needed in the below technologies:
- Hydrogen produced without emitting carbon
- Grid-scale electricity storage that can last a full season
- Electrofuels
- Advanced biofuels
- Zero-carbon cement
- Zero-carbon steel
- Plant- and cell-based meat and dairy
- Zero-carbon fertilizer
- Next-generation nuclear fission
- Nuclear fusion
- Carbon capture (both direct and point)
- Underground electricity transmission
- Zero-carbon plastics
- Geothermal energy
- Pumped hydro
- Thermal storage
- Drought- and flood-tolerant food crops
- Zero-carbon alternatives to palm oil
- Coolants that don’t contain F-gases

    The demand side is a little more complicated that the supply piece. It actually involves two steps: the proof phase, and the scale-up phase. Ideas currently in the proof phase include low-carbon cement, next-generation nuclear fission, carbon capture and sequestration, offshore wind, cellulosic ethanol (a type of advanced biofuel), and meat alternatives. Onshore wind, solar power, and EV’s are all in the scale-up phase. 

12. To summarize; First, make it a goal to get to zero —by 2050 for rich countries and as soon as or after 2050 as possible for middle-income countries. Second, develop specific plans for meeting those goals. To get to zero by 2050, we’ll need to have the policy and market structures in place by 2030. And third, any country that’s in a position to fund research needs to make sure it’s on track to make energy so cheap —to reduce the Green Premiums so much— that middle-income countries will be able to get to zero.            